when you're talking about social
cultural and political patterns
it's very easy to perceive conspiracies
everywhere when in fact what you're
seeing
are people acting in their own
individual
self-interest in an isolated
unpremeditated and idiosyncratic way
but each of them has enough in common
in terms of what that self-interest is
what objectives they're pursuing
consciously and unconsciously
that when you scale it up to the
behaviors of
millions of people and millions of
people
choosing which youtube videos they're
going to watch and what social movements
and what trends they're going to jump on
they're going to join they're going to
follow
what delusions they're going to
reinforce and which they're going to
select
to believe in and incorporate into their
own lifestyles themselves
right it starts to look like a
conspiracy
right now there is no conspiracy
to mainstream the acceptance
of steroid use of performance enhancing
drugs
if you step back and take a look at it
with detachment what's going on
right now on youtube on instagram on
twitter even
right what's happening on the internet
it looks a whole lot
like a conspiracy what i would say to
you
is this if there are two types
of advice for how to achieve the same
outcome and one of them makes money
the other one doesn't and one of them is
easy whereas the other one is hard work
our own tendency towards greed
and laziness is going to massively
amplify
one solution and silence or suffocate
the other some of you will have had this
experience
in your own life you lose weight and
maybe gain
muscle mass and you have friends or
colleagues or relatives
oh wow great how did you do that
and the minute you started to tell them
oh it was really hard work
oh yeah here's how i did it you could do
it too and you know i go to the gym for
three hours a day
and instead of taking the bus i'd walk
for an hour
uh to get to school with the heavy
backpack full of rocks
and yeah i suffered a lot you know ate
this different diet
oh yeah it's hard it's great you want to
join you want to get involved right
now part of the reason for that is that
those same people
are listening to either passively or
actively
these messages on the internet all even
on radio and television but this is
especially true with
social media with internet-based media
they're listening to messages again and
again that promise them
that this can be easy this can be fun
this can be relaxing
and of course it can cost money there's
some way
directly or indirectly that this is
generating revenue
for someone and i'm not just talking
about the drug dealer
income steroids
this pattern which seems so easy
for us to admit to ourselves when
talking about physical health
applies with even more terrifying
implications
when we start talking about mental
health
anything and everything we can say about
mental health is in the shadow
cast by our assumptions and our
assertions about human nature
so i'm gonna digress at this point to
talk a little bit about human nature
but very directly and powerfully how
it's linked to how we think about
mental health and how we resolve to do
things for self-improvement
for the sake of our mental health
most people in english-speaking
white western culture have great
difficulty
talking about human nature it's an
abstraction
they're unfamiliar and uncomfortable
with
by contrast they're very comfortable
talking about
men talking about women
what men think what men do
how women feel what women want what
women do
oh completely comfortable with that and
it doesn't really occur to us
that were in fact making statements
about human nature
and that these claims are reciprocal our
idea about
who men are what they do right this is
in the shadow cast by our assumptions
about women
and to some extent in certain
discussions our assumptions about
transgender people
uh so on and so forth right um
when we add just a few more nouns and
adjectives
to narrow down what we mean by men and
what we mean by women
it's interesting how much more clarity
focus
and purpose is brought to the
conversation
i'm not going to tell you about men i'm
going to tell you about
the type of guy who becomes a bicycle
courier
all of a sudden even if you've never met
a bicycle career in your life
or let's say you've seen bicycle careers
but you've never really had a
conversation with them and talk to them
about what their life is like
so even if for you this is purely
hypothetical purely conjectural purely
philosophical
when we talk about the types of guys who
become bike careers
right that's very different from making
a pronouncement about
men and it's very different from making
humanity now why is that
right because for most of us most of the
time
reasoning does not begin from
abstractions
to then precipitate downward toward the
grassroots
of tangible visible things in our life
right we proceed
upward from the things we really know
really touch
really feel smell taste the people we've
interacted with
we proceed upward from those people to
generalizations
and abstractions right so particular
people are bike couriers
there are particular bike careers i've
known even if i've never known them
as soon as i give you a few concrete
tangible
imaginable things to think about you
know i knew a guy
who was so passionate about bicycle
racing
as a sport and he got to be about 40
years old
and he was trying to go into like kung
fu and karate
fighting sports and then i realized it
was the same set of motivations that
fueled him under both
headings he'd always been a very small
you know short lean guy and he'd wanted
to be
in these competitive sports with the big
guys but he never could be
and riding a bicycle gave him a way to
be
competitive and had this kind of
aggression and you know
and this became a way for him to
exercise that side of his character they
felt
you know frustrated with their stymied
within in other in other walks of life
oh wow okay that's someone one of my
brothers
became a bicycle courier now
this isn't true of every bicycle career
company in the united states and canada
but where he worked he said from the
first day he got there there was this
huge uh macho ego
trip foisted onto him by the other
careers
and they showed him with pride the
chalkboard
where they had the rankings for who was
the best bike courier at the company
under different headings
how many packages delivered per day or
per hour
and how many kilometers gone in a day at
different records different stats
the same way little kids collect
baseball cards
that have statistics there were
statistics for the different writers
and they impressed upon him oh if you
want to be respected here you have to
earn it you have to
and by the way also uh in all these
theaters kind of the more athletic
theater of cycling and competitive
career
theater recycling a lot of drugs
a lot of alcohol a lot of
ostentatious cheating on one's wife for
cheating on one's girlfriend
having uh having supernumerary sexual
partners
and letting it be known to other men
rather than keeping it a secret till
they die or whatever
there's a lot of shall we say toxic
masculinity
and now we can think about this clearly
and it's clear to everyone in the
conversation that we're not
making a generalization about all
humanity we're not even making a
generalization about all men
we're not even making a generalization
about bicycle careers because there will
be individual bicycle carriers who work
in that same
company and feel alienated from this and
have this tension with their co-workers
right now we're talking about human
motivations in a way that we can all
understand it's very important that we
build up to our generalizations
about culture about politics about
nebulous concepts like mental health in
this way
starting from proceeding from the
tangible world of
uh grassroots reality
i saw a youtube video today that was
dealing in part with
mental health and it was dealing in part
with relations between
the genders shall we say and this person
don't know how old she is she was
referring to
high school as if it were the day before
yesterday so i'm guessing this is
someone who graduated from high school
within the last couple of years
i dunno um
she was so certain that her experience
with how men treated women and how men
treated other women
pardon me how men treated other men how
women treated other women
her experience with gender relations was
definitive and universal and this was
human nature and this was something she
was going to have to cope with
her whole life as she now looks forward
to her 20s and 30s and 40s
whatever that this was something
inflexible and unchanging
and if we could just shift the
discussion from being
men to being as specific
as the type of guy who becomes a bike
career right
i think already there's a way out of
this trap this way of thinking
this this sense of false security
in knowing what human nature is
okay so you went to a high school
apparently
where football was a big deal and male
competitive spirit was a big deal these
different things you
you complain about you explain um
i know some high schools where these
same factors
are better and somewhere they're worse
but i know some high schools where your
whole assessment of human nature
would fundamentally be different have
you ever heard about uh performing
performing arts school have you ever
heard about a high school
sometimes these are just for the last
two years of high school where every
single kid there
is either an aspiring professional
musician
aspiring actor singer
this sort of thing every single kid in
the school
already see we've shifted from talking
about men
and humanity to a certain type of person
so already all kinds of things you can
think about these kids these are kids
whose parents support them in making
this decision these are a lot of these
are kids whose parents have put pressure
on them
to succeed to be a movie star to be a
singer to musician
now maybe they're competitive in some
ways but not in the same way as a
football hero is competing to be the
best in the football team right
already everything has has shifted maybe
some of them are very
shallow and care only about their looks
but i got to tell you i knew people in
the theater
who were not conventionally good looking
at all and and were successful in
addressing success through other routes
and there are people there who are i
remember this
i knew people who were getting their
meal ticket punched by getting technical
expertise
in lighting and set design people with
the attitude that they could
they could try to be a movie star one
day but they were going to be able to
pay their rent with some technical
skills
into theater filmmaking set design that
kind of thing okay wow already again
maybe none of you have ever met this
kind of person you know just like the
bike courier right
you might not have any real experience
of this but we've somehow
provided enough fodder for the
imagination that we've broken away from
universalizing generalizing
abstract claims about human nature
have you ever heard about these special
magnet schools
that are just for students who are
pursuing a career in the hard sciences
where every single student there
believes they're going to have a career
in physics or chemistry
just simplify the sciences they say of
course in real life there'd be biology
and a few other things mixed in all
right
and that high school will have its own
ego trips it will have its own
gender identity issues and struggles
probably
men at that school will have their own
way of being macho
and women will have their own way of
employing different strategies and
whether it's
you know women struggling with other
women or women struggling with the
attention of men or whatever it is
but already what a different universe we
seem to be describing what a different
world we seem to be imagining when we've
just
narrowed it down to talk about real
people with real
faces with real motivations and you know
each one of these settings
has its own kind of pathos its own kind
of
inevitable tragedy in the milieu of the
hard sciences
tell me seriously what percentage these
kids are actually going to go on
to have a career in chemistry what
percentage of them
are going to go on to have a career in
physics what percentage of the guys
on your football team or baseball team
what percentage of them even had amateur
sport as a significant part of their
lives let alone
professional sport there's a lot of
failure there are a lot of
illusions and delusions to go around all
right
and i think the deepest part of this
predictable tragedy
of all there will be people
who go into theater who go into film who
go into physics who go into chemistry
and once they get there they say
if i had known that this is what it was
going to be like i never would have
wanted this
in the first i never would have wanted
this future for myself i would never
would have wanted this career
i never would have chosen this course of
study i would have done something else
and we'll never have percentages for how
many people
feel that way
the most basic premise of my philosophy
is that if you change what you know
it will change how you feel
and this is fundamentally a very
optimistic message
even though it is most easily
demonstrated
with human tragedy
i had a grandfather who wanted
all his life to be a lawyer
and he felt frustrated and self-pitying
and so on that he had never
achieved this that he'd never gone into
law i'm a hundred percent certain
that he lived his whole life with
frankly a
naive russian immigrants set of
delusions about what the practice of the
law
is like in canada i'm not saying he knew
a whole hell of a lot about what being a
lawyer was like in russia
we would be talking about russia before
the communist revolution
he probably had very 19th century
attitudes
about being a lawyer that carried on
into the 20th century then he had a
totally
romanticized idea that being a lawyer
meant you sat down at philosophical
discussions about politics in canada or
somewhere
and i can say with some certainty for
him and for many people in the audience
if he knew what it was like
if he knew what the process of law
school was like if you knew what the
daily experience of being a lawyer was
like
if he knew that it would change the way
he felt it would change the way he felt
about his own life here and now
it changed the way he felt looking back
at his life over the last 10 years
the last 50 years or what have you right
what we know
changes what we feel
how many people right now watching this
youtube video
on some level are still holding on to
the thought
that there's somebody they wanted to
[ __ ]
in high school and that their whole life
would be better
and their whole life would be different
now if only they'd slept with that
person and if only they'd
fall in love with that person or maybe
they'd be married today
some of you some of you
might have this attitude might have this
attachment and then you just happen to
click
on a podcast or you just happened to
on a youtube video and there was that
person
you could have [ __ ] in high school 10
years later
and they're all grown up and they're
talking about who they
really are and who it is they've become
as the years went by and you sit back
and go
whoa i'm so glad i didn't fall in love
with that person
i'm so glad i didn't get married to that
person
all right what you know
changes how you feel
the ignorance of or contempt for
this factor is a huge fundamental
problem
with our whole model of therapy
and mental health in the 21st century uh
decadent west now
just say again very briefly i remember
talking to a relatively young man i
think he was in his late 20s
on the internet who was making
generalizations about
women and men and human nature
in france and he openly
indicated that his experience was based
on his high school and
his university and i said to him
did you not notice that there were
separate high schools
for muslims that there were separate
high schools
for catholics that there were separate
high schools for orthodox jewish people
and this kind of thing those are people
too
those people also count in your
reckoning of
humanity and human nature and
it's harder to deal with than people who
chose to study the sciences
or people who chose to study theater
performing arts school this kind of
thing
precisely because most of those people
didn't make that choice
at some stage they had the choice made
for them to have that
cultural identity that religious
identity um and so on
but nevertheless if you're making
generalizations about
men if you're making generalizations
about human nature
right away this puts us in a whole
different frame of reference
and it's interesting to me how most of
the major
tenets of biopsychiatry
completely fall apart and are revealed
to be risible
laughable as soon as we bring in this
type of
intercultural comparative analysis oh
well
what you've just said would this be true
of a japanese
person would this be true of a muslim
person a
muslim person from indonesia let's say
you have to specify a little bit more
than that and so on
um we have claims
that are supposedly innate and universal
to human nature that are regarded as
science
but they are every bit as childish as
claims about
human nature men women gender roles
that are based on your particular high
school
your experience growing up and to be
fair
that experience may have been so
traumatic for you or so shocking
that you have great difficulty thinking
about it uh
with detachment now at the start of this
video i said
if there are two types of advice
competing
and one of them earns money and one of
them doesn't
one of them appeals to your sense of
laziness
just take it easy just relax and one of
them
appeals to you to be resolute
hard-working self-discipline exhaust
yourself
push yourselves
you will in effect have a cultural
conspiracy
to promote the option that's fast and
easy and costs money
and to conceal the one that's the
opposite of those things
you have what seems like a conspiracy
even though
nobody is conspiring because individual
actors and influencers
are all pursuing their own self-interest
i think the deepest misconception about
mental health in the united states of
america today
is that relaxation brings about
personal progress brings about
self-improvement that all of your
problems could be
solved if only you could be
relaxed enough and on a very deep level
this rests on the assumption that your
mental health
is emotional and that it's something
that is attained by returning
to homeostasis or turning to a
resting state rather than exerting
yourself
now i think this is just as delusional
as pretending
that having an amazing physique being
lean
and muscular is homeostasis
it's something you can achieve just by
relaxing
just by taking it easy right
now some of you may think well yeah but
come on relaxation
doesn't cost any money so what does this
have to do with your your fundamental
premise
for this video have you kind of gone off
top here no
no what's hard to understand about
relaxation is that it can be infinitely
marketed
infinitely monetized not only to the
sale of drugs
alcohol vacations recreation
relaxation is actually very easy to
monetize
hard work not so much
americans separate
emotional development from intellectual
development
their concepts of intellectual
development correctly
is that it's hard work and doesn't make
any money
those two things are completely true
they also and i would say this is true
of europeans the french the germans
also the english they also think of the
life of an intellectual
intellectual work the life of the mind
they think of being an intellectual
as a kind of luxury
above and beyond what's essential to
life
they think of it as being something like
going to the opera
which it is not uh
for many different reasons including the
fact that being an intellectual
isn't something you do on friday night
it's something you do
all the time it's something that changes
the way you live
think and feel 24 7.
okay now counter opposed
to this idea of intellectual work
is the american ideal of
emotional work
so last 30 years
the verbiage and cultural assumptions
for emotional work it's developed a lot
right what is emotional work
talking to your boyfriend girlfriend
husband wife
talking to your therapist
taking antidepressant drugs
smoking marijuana
the concept of emotional
self-development
basically boils down to being sedate
at all times and they're quite willing
to achieve this
through sedation through drugs but if
not
if not through drugs massage
massage therapy vacation packages
right certain kinds of especially
self-indulgent
exercise sports the idea is
that you just have to do less you have
to relax
more you have to not experience anxiety
alertness work
fear and that this will let you regress
to a kind of homeostasis
that if you're just in a relaxed enough
state
and let time go by maybe years go by
that you will emotionally blossom
into this better person you will achieve
some kind of self-cultivation or
personal development
and what is nagging away at the american
imagination
is this awareness that can never quite
be eradicated
that can never quite be fully repressed
that no the outcomes we desire
in terms of self-cultivation and
personal development are
hard work and the type of work
we're talking about is intellectual
in nature
i think that most of what we perceive
now
as mental health problems here meaning
emotional problems the term is so broad
i could now
digress into narrowing down what we mean
by emotional health problems
i'm not saying all the vast majority
of what our society struggles with
as mental health problems i do not mean
dyslexia
i do not mean medically real learning
disabilities brain abnormalities i do
not mean having a disorder
that causes your whole nervous system to
twitch or seize up
the vast majority of what we now deal
with under headings like
depression anxiety so on and so forth
can be improved and can be overcome
through intellectual hard work
it's not just one problem so you're not
going to have
just one solution what do you do
when you read history
when you read history you live
through the eyes of other people
you sympathize with and you imagine
their experiences i often get very
emotional
reading the history of recently history
of france history of napoleon
and the french revolution and i find
myself
sympathizing with people who are on the
opposite side
to myself politically here and now
i find that i can sympathize deeply
with young men who decided to stand up
and fight
for the king of france
in the french revolution i'm of course
i'm totally opposed
to monarchy i prefer democracy so forth
but when you are going through that
history with some
detail it can't be on the level of
proclamations about human nature about
men
right about mankind or men in the other
sense right
when you're really reading about the
choices these people
faced what they knew what the options
were
in front of them i can totally
profoundly sympathize and even weep
reading about the choices young men made
to support the king of france and to
fight and die
for doomed ideology right
does that prepare me in some
simple sense for the miseries
and struggles and disappointment in my
own life
it prepares me to cope
with the contradictions the struggles
the sorrows
of history as it unfolds around me
on the most intimate scale my own family
the most grandiose scale the whole
society the whole world or
huge nations all right in a manner that
is
not easy to summarize that is not
easy to write up on a chalkboard
as a formula you know what is easy
to put up on a chalkboard a diagram of
the effects that antidepressants have on
your brain
oh oh this is the pro the problem isn't
that you have a meaningless life
the problem isn't that you know you're
you're struggling
to live a meaningless pardon me that
you're struggling to live a meaningful
life
in a society that in many ways confronts
and confounds and denigrates you you
know the problem isn't
that you're a kid in high school who
wants to have sex
but can't who wants to be respected who
finds themselves
denigrated and disrespected by other
students by teachers by the whole
system the problem isn't that you know
you feel
some sense of instinctual yearning to be
part of a tribe to be part of a clan to
have
friends and colleagues and instead
you're all alone playing video games
no no no no no no no no the problem is
your
brain chemistry the problem is your
dopamine levels
and and we have a pill supposedly that
can solve that well okay
let's just say you start smoking
marijuana
and taking prozac standard
antidepressant okay so now you're still
in high
school you still have all these social
and political conflicts you don't
understand
you still have this yearning to get laid
to be loved to be adored maybe you even
yearn to be a leader of men maybe you
you know you have more grandiose desires
than this
you want to be part of a tribe you want
to be somebody important you want to be
someone valued you want to be respected
instead you're disrespected
you know maybe even you want to be smart
and successful
and you want teachers to tell you that
you're special and you're a genius
maybe you want to get a pluses or maybe
you want to have better opportunities
church you want all kinds of things
right and you still want those things
but now you're sedated
now you're less able to cope with or
comprehend any of those things or to
achieve those ambitions right
but relaxation as the model of mental
health
is infinitely marketable it's highly
profitable
and it appeals to your sense of laziness
the idea that you can feel better you
can overcome your depression
you can even become a better person if
only you relax
enough no matter how expensive the
vacation no matter how expensive the
therapy
sitting and talking about your feelings
right all of this
profoundly appeals to our sense of
laziness and our sense of our
own implicit inherent inborn specialness
that if only we could just be ourselves
just relax all the way
and this is just as dumb as supposing
that you're going to develop amazing
musculature
through the same course of relaxation
right compassion
is a muscle you develop it through
exercise
when i read books of political history
there's nothing on the cover
that says this is a course in compassion
okay they don't look like self-help
books
when you read voltaire talking about
slavery you may feel compassion
for the slaves you may feel compassion
for voltaire
as the commentator on slavery and you
know what
if you keep doing research you may feel
compassion for the slave owners
you may feel compassion as twisted as it
feels for what they were going through
how it was they conditioned themselves
to accept this
awful oppressive social system and to
play their part in it how they justified
what they were doing with their lives
all right any respectable
history book about slavery including the
french revolution by the way and slavery
and the french revolution
okay is going to help to train you
in compassion it's going to help to
train you to regard social problems
political problems and personal problems
in your own time
in your own society and even in your own
life even in your own family
in a very different way learning
to look through the eyes of napoleon
bonaparte someone i completely despise
completely morally disprove of i can
even say i hate napoleon bonaparte okay
looking through the eyes of napoleon
blown apart can change the way you feel
about your relationship with your own
mother
about your relationship in your own
marriage
even about your own struggles in high
school or whatever the case may be
that's not promised by the book cover
but that's something you can accomplish
that's a real change you can accomplish
in your life through
hard intellectual work when you develop
yourself
as an intellectual at a minimum
you are increasing your ability to
cope with the emotional strains
that are now in our culture perceived or
misperceived as mental illness
the fundamental puzzle the fundamental
problem we're dealing with
in american and english-speaking culture
is the separation of the human mind
into intellectual and emotional spheres
when they are in fact one and the same
the cure to your emotional problems
cannot be found
through relaxation cannot be found
through medication
it can be found only and exclusively
through self-cultivation
self-discipline intellectual hard work